# `mm0-lean`

This is not a particular product, but rather a collection of scratch files and formalizations at different levels of interest.

## Compilation

The `mm0-lean` directory is a lean 3 package with a `leanpkg.toml` file, so it should work out of the box to run `lean --make` in the subdirectory.

## Points of interest

* `mm0/set` is a framework for translating theorems from [`set.mm`](https://github.com/metamath/set.mm/) into lean.
  * [`mm0/set/basic.lean`](mm0/set/basic.lean) is the initial file, which contains lean definitions replacing all the metamath axioms (mostly "definition axioms").
  * `mm0/set/set.lean` through `mm0/set/set6.lean` are autogenerated files, produced by translating `set.mm` to MM0, and from there to Lean, using `mm0-hs` as follows:

        stack exec -- mm0-hs from-mm set.mm -f dirith,elnnne0 -o out.mm0 out.mmu
        stack exec -- mm0-hs to-lean out.mmu -a .basic -c 2000 -n mm -o mm0-lean/mm0/set/set.lean

    * The `-f dirith,elnnne0` says we are interested in the theorems `dirith` and `elnnne0` and their dependents (which is significantly less than all of `set.mm`, and generally preferred if you have a particular goal theorem).
    * The `-c 2000` controls how many theorems appear in each lean file, because lean tends to choke on very large files.

  * [`mm0/set/post.lean`](mm0/set/post.lean) is a manually written postprocessing file, that imports the autogenerated theorems and relates Metamath notions to Lean notions, so that one can obtain a native-Lean statement rather than a deep embedded Metamath statement in Lean. Currently, we are demonstrating this by proving theorem `dirith'` (Dirichlet's theorem), which uses only Lean definitions but is processed from the analogous MM theorem `dirith`.

* [`mm0/meta/basic.lean`](mm0/meta/basic.lean) and [`mm0/meta/meta.lean`](mm0/meta/meta.lean) are an experimental framework for being able to write MM0 theorems by syntactic restriction of lean theorems, and [`mm0/set.lean`](mm0/set.lean) is a demonstration.

* [`mm0/mm0b.lean`](mm0/mm0b.lean) is a formalization of the MMB operational semantics in lean.

* [`mm0/fol.lean`](mm0/fol.lean) is a syntactic model of MM0/ZFC in Lean using deep embedding to schemes in FOL in the language of ZFC. This is WIP but proves soundness of MM0 with `set.mm` axioms.

* `x86/` contains a number of experimental formalizations relating to verified compilation down to a model of `x86-64`.

* [`x86/x86.lean`](x86/x86.lean) is a formalization of the full `x86` model that is of interest for the MM0 bootstrapping project. It is parallel to [`examples/x86.mm0`](../examples/x86.mm0).
* [`x86/lemmas.lean`](x86/lemmas.lean) proves some facts about the model, in particular determinism of the decoder.

* [`x86/assembly.lean`](x86/assembly.lean) formalizes an initial assembly pass to make labels symbolic and remove explicit reference to the PC.

* [`x86/matching.lean`](x86/matching.lean) and [`x86/separation.lean`](x86/separation.lean) are two competing formalizations for higher level constructs, based on matching logic (see [K framework](http://www.kframework.org/index.php/Main_Page)) and separation logic (see [Iris](https://iris-project.org/) et al.) respectively.
